CSC 4575: Capstone Project
Secure Hybrid Pipeline
Department of Computer Science
Spring 2026
Format: 3-Week Cumulative Engineering Project & Final Laboratory Report
Infrastructure: Python 3, Docker (Network Namespaces), Wireshark
CAE-CD Alignment: CAE-CD KUs (BCY, ACR, CSP, IAS)
1 Project Overview
Over the next three weeks, you will transition from cryptographic theory to practical security
engineering. You will build a secure, hybrid cryptographic pipeline between two Docker containers
across a custom bridged network.
By the end of this capstone, you will have manually implemented the “bootstrapping” process
used by modern secure protocols (like TLS and Signal): establishing an asymmetric key exchange,
verifying identity with digital signatures, and securing a bulk data payload using an authenticated
symmetric cipher.
Grading Rubric (100 Points Total)
Your final laboratory report and code submission will be evaluated on the following distribution:
•60% - Functional & Defensive Codebase: Python implementation using cryptography.hazmat.
Code must execute without errors and strictly adhere to defensive best practices (e.g., constant-
time comparisons, secure entropy, zero nonce reuse).
•20% - Network Verification (Wireshark): Submission of annotated .pcap files proving
that plaintext data is never exposed on the wire and demonstrating the sequential flow of the
cryptographic handshake.
•20% - AI Research & Standards Validation: Accurate documentation of your weekly AI
research prompts, the AI’s output, and your manual verification of the AI’s claims against official
NIST/RFC standards.
2 Week 1: Infrastructure & The Symmetric Payload
Goal: Establish the network pipeline and secure a data stream using AES-256-GCM with a pre-
shared key.
1
2.1 Phase A: The Infrastructure Setup
1. Docker Environment: We have provided a docker-compose.yml file that establishes two
services (alice node and bob node) on a custom bridged network named br-crypto.
2. Packet Capture: You must attach Wireshark or tcpdump to this specific Docker bridge
interface on your host VM. This ensures you only capture your application traffic without
background OS noise.
3. Skeleton Code: Review the provided server.py and client.py files. They contain stan-
dard TCP socket boilerplate. Your job is to implement the cryptography.
2.2 Phase B: Cryptographic Implementation (AES-GCM)
You must implement the encrypt payload() and decrypt payload() functions using the Python
cryptography.hazmat.primitives.ciphers module.
•The Cipher: AES-256 in Galois/Counter Mode (GCM).
•The Key: For Week 1 only, use the hardcoded 32-byte pre-shared key provided in the
skeleton file.
•The Nonce: You must generate a strictly unique 12-byte nonce for every single encryption
operation using os.urandom().
•Transmission: Over the socket, you must send the combination of the Nonce, the Ciphertext,
and the GCM Authentication Tag.
2.3 Phase C: AI Research & Validation Task
As covered in Module 3, AI is an explanation amplifier, not an authoritative source.
1. The Prompt: Ask a Generative AI (e.g., Gemini, ChatGPT, Claude) the following: “Explain
the mathematical difference between AES-CBC and AES-GCM. Why does AES-GCM fail
catastrophically if a nonce is reused?”
2. The Validation: Read the AI’s response. Then, open NIST SP 800-38D (Recommenda-
tion for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode).
3. The Deliverable: Write a 1-paragraph summary in your lab report detailing whether the
AI’s explanation of Galois field multiplication and nonce constraints aligned with the NIST
standard. Did the AI hallucinate or oversimplify any mathematical constraints?
2.4 Phase D: Week 1 Verification
Run your client and server. Capture the transaction in Wireshark.
•Proof 1 (Confidentiality): Take a screenshot of the TCP payload in Wireshark. Prove
that your secret message is indistinguishable from random noise.
•Proof 2 (Integrity): Temporarily modify your code to flip a single bit in the ciphertext
before it is processed by decrypt payload(). Take a screenshot of the resulting InvalidTag
exception, proving your GCM implementation detects tampering.
2
3 Lab Execution Instructions
To execute the Week 1 lab, follow these operational commands on your host machine:
1. Start the Infrastructure: Run the following command in the directory containing your
project files:
docker -compose up -d
2. Attach Wireshark: Open Wireshark on your host machine and begin capturing on the
br-crypto interface. Filter the traffic using the display filter: tcp.port == 65432.
3. Run the Server (Bob): In your terminal, execute:
docker exec -it bob_node python server.py
4. Run the Client (Alice): Open a second, separate terminal and execute:
docker exec -it alice_node python client.py
5. Shutdown: When you are finished, clean up the Docker environment by running:
docker -compose down
4 Looking Ahead (Preview)
•Week 2 (The Asymmetric Bootstrap): You will delete the hardcoded AES key. You
will implement an Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) exchange over the wire (using the
X25519 curve) to dynamically generate a shared scalar S, which you will pass through an
HKDF to derive your AES key.
•Week 3 (Identity & Integrity): You will generate RSA or ECDSA identity keys to digitally
sign your ephemeral ECDH public points before transmission, thwarting active Man-in-the-
Middle attacks.